Even if you train a system to have a world model
that can predict what's going to happen next,
the world is really complicated and there's
probably all kinds of situations that the system
hasn't been trained on and need to, you know,
fine-tune itself as it goes. The question of how
we organize AI research going forward, which is
somewhat determined by how afraid people are of
the consequences of AI. So if you have a rather
positive view of the impact of AI on society and
you trust humanity and society and democracies
to use it in good ways, then the best way to make
progress is to open research.
AI might be the most important new computer
technology ever. It's storming every industry
and literally billions of dollars are being
invested, so buckle up. The problem is that
AI needs a lot of speed and processing power.
So how do you compete without cost spiraling
out of control? It's time to upgrade to
the next generation of the cloud Oracle
Cloud Infrastructure, or OCI. OCI is a single
platform for your infrastructure, database,
application development and AI needs. OCI has
four to eight times the bandwidth of other clouds,
offers one consistent price instead of
variable regional pricing and, of course,
nobody does data better than Oracle. So now you
can train your AI models at twice the speed and
less than half the cost of other clouds. If you
want to do more and spend less, like Uber 8x8,
and Databricks Mosaic, take a free test drive of
OCI at oracle.com/eyeonai. That's E-Y-E-O-N-A-I
all run together oracle.com/eyeonai.
Hi, I'm Craig Smith. This is Eye on AI. In
this episode, I speak again with Yann LeCun,
one of the founders of deep learning and someone
who followers of AI should need no introduction
to. Yann talks about his work on developing world
models, on why he does not believe AI research
poses a threat to humanity and why he thinks open
source AI models are the future. In the course of
the conversation we talk about a new model Gaia
I, developed by a company called Wayve.AI. I'll
have an episode with Wayve's founder to further
explore that world model, which has produced
some startling results. I hope you find the
conversation with Yann as enlightening as I did.
I mean, first, the notion of a world model
is the idea that the system would get some
idea of the state of the world and be able to
predict the sort of following states of the
world resulting from just the natural evolution
of the world or resulting from an action that
the agent might take. If you have an idea
of the state of the world and you imagine
an action that you're going to take and you
can predict the resulting state of the world,
then that means you can predict what's going to
happen as a consequence of a sequence of actions.
That means you can plan a sequence of actions to
arrive at a particular goal. That's really what
a world model is. At least that's what the Wayve
people have understood the word in other contexts,
like in the context of optimal control
and robotics and things like that. That's
what a world model is. Now there's several
levels of complexity of those world models,
whether they model yourself, the agent, or whether
they model the external world, which is much more
complicated. Training a world model basically
consists in just observing the world go by and
then learning to predict what's going to happen
next, or observing the world taking an action and
then observing the resulting effect, an action that
you take as an agent or an action that you see
other agents taking. That establishes causality.
Essentially, you could think of this as a causal
model. Those models don't need to predict all the
details about the world, they don't need to be
generative, they don't need to predict exactly
every pixels in a video, for example, because
what you need to be able to predict is enough
details, some sort of abstract representation,
to allow you to plan. You're assembling something
out of wood and you're going to put two planks
together and attach them with screws. It doesn't
matter the details of which type of screwdriver
you're using or the size of the screw within some
limits and things like that. There are details
that in the end don't matter as to what the end
result will be or the precise grain of the wood
and things of that type. You need to have some
abstract level of representation within which you
can make the prediction without having to predict
every detail. That's why those JEPA architectures
I've been advocating are useful. Models like the
Gaia 1 model from Wayve actually make predictions
in an abstract representation space. There's been
a lot of work in that area for years, also at
FAIR (Facebook AI Research), but generally the abstract representationswere pre-trained. So, the encoders that would take
images from videos and then encode them into some
representation were trained in some other way. The
progress we've made over the last six months in
self-supervised learning for images and video
is that now we can train the entire system to make
those predictions simultaneously. We have systems
now that can learn good representations of images.
The basic idea is very simple. You take an image,
you run it through an encoder, then you
corrupt that image. You mask parts of it,
for example, or you transform it in various ways.
You blur it, you change the colors, you change the
framing a little bit and you run that corrupted
image through the same encoder or something
very similar, and then you train the encoder to
predict the features of the complete image from
the features of the corrupted one. You're not
trying to reconstruct the perfect image, you're
just trying to predict the representation of it,
and this is different. This is not generative in
the sense that it does not produce pixels, and
that's the secret to getting self-supervised learning to
work in the context of images and video. You don't
want to be predicting pixels. It doesn't work. You
can produce pixels as an afterthought, which
is what the Gaia system is doing by sticking a
decoder on it and with some diffusion models that
will produce a nice image. But that's kind of a
second step. If you train the system by predicting
pixels, you just don't get good representations,
you don't get good predictions, you get
blurry predictions most of the time. So
that's what makes learning from images and video
fundamentally different from learning from text,
because in text you don't have that problem. It's
easy to predict words, even if you cannot make a
perfect prediction, because language is discrete.
So language is simple compared to the real world.
And there's a lot written right
now about the energy required
in the computational resources, the
GPUs required to train language
models. Is it less in training a world
model, like using I-JEPA architecture?
Well, it's hard to tell because there
is no equivalent training procedure,
self-supervised training procedure for video,
for example, that does not use JEPA. The
ones that are generative don't really work.
Yeah, yeah Well, but this architecture could
also be applied to language, couldn't it?
Oh yeah, absolutely yeah. So you could
very well use a JEPA architecture that
makes predictions in representation
space and apply it to language.
Yeah, definitely, and in that case
would it be less computationally
intense than training a large
language model. It's possible.
It's not entirely clear either. I mean, there
is some advantage, regardless of what technique
you're using, to making those models really big.
They just seem to work better if you make them
big. So if you make them bigger, right. So scaling
is useful. Contrary to some claims, I do not
believe that scaling is sufficient. So, in other
words, we're not going to get anywhere close to
human level AI, in fact, not even animal level
AI, by simply scaling up language models, even
multi-model language models that we apply to
video. We're going to have to find new concepts,
new architectures and I've written a vision
paper about this a while back of a different
type of architecture that would be necessary for
this. So scaling is necessary, but not sufficient,
and we're missing some basic ingredients to get to
human level AI. We're fooled by the fact that LLMs
are fluent and so we think that they have human
level intelligence because they can manipulate
language, but that's false and in fact, there's a
very good symptom for this, which is that we have
systems that can pass the bar exam, but answering
questions from text by basically regurgitating
what they've learned more or less by rote, but we
don't have completely autonomous level five self
driving cars, or at least no system that can learn
to do this in about 20 hours of practice just like
any 17-year-old, and we certainly don't have any
domestic robot that can clear up the dinner table
and fill up the dishwasher - at task that any
10-year-old can learn in one shot. So clearly
we're missing something big, and that something
is an ability to learn how the world works and
the world is much more complicated than language
and also being able to plan and reason. Basically
having a mental world model of what goes on
that allows us to plan and predict consequences
of actions. That's what we're missing. And it's
going to take a while before we figure this out.
You were on another paper that talked
about augmented language models and the
embodied Turing test. Was that the same
paper? The embodied Turing test? Can you
talk about that? First of all, what is
the embodied Turing test? I didn't.
I didn't quite understand that. Well,
okay, it's, it's a different concept,
but it's basically the idea that you it's
based on the, on the, the Moravec paradox,
right? So Moravec many years ago noticed
that things that appeared difficult for
humans turned out to sometimes be very easy
for computers to do, like playing chess,
much better than humans, or, I don't
know, computing integrals or whatever,
certainly doing arithmetics. But then there are
things that we take for granted as humans that we
don't even consider them intelligent tasks that we
are incapable of reproducing with computers. And
so that's where the embodied Turing test comes
in. Like you know, observe what a cat can do,
or how fast a cat can learn new, new, new tricks.
Or you know how a cat can plan to jump on,
you know, a bunch of different furniture to get
to the top of wherever it wants to go. That's an
amazing feat that we can't reproduce with robots
today. So that's kind of the embodied Turing test,
if you want, like you know, can you make a
robot that can behave, have behaviors that are
indistinguishable from those of animals first of
all, and can acquire new ones, at the same, with the
same efficiency as animals. Then the augmented LLM
paper is different. It's about how do you sort of
minimally change large language models so that
they can use tools, so they can to some extent
plan actions? Like you know, you need to compute
the product of two numbers, right, you just call
a calculator and you know you're going to get
the product of those two numbers. And LLMs are
notoriously bad for arithmetics, so they need to do
this kind of stuff or do a search, you know, using
a search engine or database look up, or something
like that. So there's a lot of work on this right
now and it's somewhat incremental, like you know.
How can you sort of minimally change LLM and
take advantage of their current capabilities but
still augment them with the ability to use tools?
Yeah, and I don't want to get too much into
the threat debate, but you know you're on
one side. Your colleagues Geoff and Yoshua are
on the other. I recently saw a picture of the
three of you. I think you put that up on social
media saying how you know you can disagree but
still be friends. This idea of augmenting
language models with stronger reasoning
capabilities and the ability and agency, the
ability to use tools, is precisely what Geoff
and Yoshua are worried about. Can you just
get into why are you not worried about that?
Okay, so first, first of all, this is
not necessarily what you're describing,
is not necessarily what they are afraid
of. They, they, they are alerting people
and various governments and others about various
dangers that they perceive. Okay, so one danger,
one set of dangers are relatively short term.
There are things like, you know, bad people will
use technology for bad things. What can bad people
use powerful AI systems for? And one concern
that you know governments have been worried about
and Intelligence agencies encounter intelligence
and stuff like that is, you know, could badly
intentioned organizations or countries use LLMs
to help them, I don't know, design pathogens
or chemical weapons or other things, or cyb, or
cyber attacks? You know things like that. Right
Now, those problems are not new. Those problems
have been with us for a long time and the question
is what incremental help would AI systems bring to
the table? So my opinion is that, as of today, AI
systems are not sophisticated enough to provide
any significant help for such badly intentioned
people, because those systems are trained with
public data that is publicly available on the
internet and they can't really invent anything.
They're going to regurgitate with a little bit of
interpolation if you want, but they cannot produce
anything that you can't get from a search engine
in a few minutes, so that actually that claim
is being tested at the moment. There are people
who are actually kind of trying to figure it out,
like is it the case that you can actually do
something - You're able to do something more
dangerous with the sort of current AI technology
that you can't do with a search engine? Results
are not out yet, but my hunch is that you know
it's not going to enable a lot of people to do
significantly bad things. Then there is the issue
of things like code generation for cyber, cyber
attacks and things like this, and those problems
have been with us for years. And the interesting
thing that most people should know, like you know
also, for disinformation or attempts to corrupt the
electoral process and things like this, and what's
very important for everyone to know is that the
best countermeasures that we have against all of
those attacks currently use AI massively. Okay,
so AI is used as a defense mechanism against
those attacks. It's not actually used to do the
attacks yet, and so now it becomes the question
of you know who has the better system? Like other
countermeasures, is the AI used by counter, by
the countermeasures, but significantly better
than the AI used by the attackers so that, you know,
the problem is satisfactorily mitigated, and
that's where we are. Now, the good news is that
there are many more good guys than bad guys at
the moment. They're usually much more competent,
they're usually much more sophisticated, they're
usually much better funded and they have a strong
incentive to take down the attackers. So it's a
game of cat and mouse, just like every yeah, every
security that's ever existed. There's nothing new
there. Okay, no, nothing quite so new.
Yeah, but okay, but then there is the question
of existential risk, right, and this is something
that both Geoff and Yoshua have been thinking of
fairly recently. So for Geoff, it's only sort of
just before last summer that he became he started
thinking about this because before he thought he
was convinced that the kind of algorithms that
we had were significantly inferior to the kind of
learning algorithm that the brain used, and the
epiphany he had was that, in fact, no, because
looking at the capabilities of large language
models that can do pretty amazing things with a
relatively small number of neurons and synapses,
he said maybe they're more efficient than the
brain and maybe the learning algorithm that we use,
back propagation, is actually better than whatever
it is that the brain uses. So he started thinking
about, like you know what are the consequences,
and but that's very recent and in my opinion he
hasn't thought about this enough. Yoshua went
to a similar epiphany last winter where he started
thinking about the long-term consequences and came
to the conclusion also that there was a potential
danger. They're both convinced that AI has
enormous potential benefits. They're just worried
about the dangers. And they're both worried
about the dangers because they have some doubts
about the ability of our institutions to do the
best with technology Whether they are political,
economic, geopolitical, financial institutions or
industrial to do the right thing, to be motivated
by the right thing. So if you trust the system,
if you trust humanity and democracy, you might be
entitled to believe that society is going to make
the best use of future technology. If you don't
believe in the solidity of those institutions,
then you might be scared. I think I'm more
confident in humanity and democracy than they are,
and whatever current systems than they are. I've
been thinking about this problem for much longer,
actually, since at least 2014. So when I started
FAIR at Facebook at the time, it became pretty
clear pretty early on that deploying AI systems
was going to have big consequences on people and
society, and we got confronted to this very early,
and so I started thinking about those problems
very early on. Things like countermeasures
against bias in AI systems, systematic bias,
countermeasures against attacks, or detection of
hate speech in every language these are things
that people at FAIR (Facebook AI Research) worked on and thenwere eventually deployed. To just to give you
an example, the proportion of hate speech that
was taken down automatically by AI systems five
years ago, in 2017, was about 20% to 25%. Last
year it was 95%, and the difference is entirely
due to progress in natural language understanding.
Entirely due to transformers that are pretrained,
self-supervised and can essentially detect
hate speech in any language. Not perfectly
Nothing is perfect, it's never perfect. But AI is
just massively there and that's the solution. So
I started thinking about those issues, including
existential risk, very early on, in fact, in 2015,
early 2016, actually, I organized a conference
hosted at NYU on the future of AI where a lot
of those questions were discussed. I invited
people like Nick Bostrom and Eric Schmidt and
Mark Schroepfer, who was the CTO of Facebook
at the time, Demis Hassabis, a lot of people,
both from the academic and AI research side and
from the industry side, and there were two days,
a public day and kind of a more private day.
What came out of this is the creation of an
institution called the Partnership on AI. This is
a discussion I had with Demis Hassabis, which was:
would it be useful to have a forum where we can
discuss, before they happen, sort of bad things
that could happen as a consequence of deploying
AI? Pretty soon, we brought on board Eric Horvitz
and a bunch of other people. We co-founded
this thing called the Partnership on AI, which
basically has been funding studies about AI ethics
and consequences of AI and publishing guidelines
about how you do it right to minimize harm. So
this is not a new thing for me. I've been thinking
about this for 10 years essentially, whereas
for Yoshua and Geoff it's much more recent.
Yeah, but nonetheless, this augmented AI
or augmented language models that have
stronger reasoning and agency raises the threat,
regardless of whether or not it
can be countered to a higher level.
Right, okay. So I guess the question there becomes
what is the blueprint of future AI systems that
will be capable of reasoning and planning, will
understand how the world works, will be able to
use tools and have agency and things like
that? Right? And I tell you they will not
be autoregressive LLMs. So the problems that we
see at the moment of autoregressive LLMs are the
fact that they hallucinate, they sometimes say
really stupid things, they don't really have
a good understanding of the world. People claim
that they have some simple world model, but it's
very implicit and it's really not good at all.
For example, you can tell an LLM that A is the
same as B and then you ask if B is the same as A
and it will say I don't know or no, right? I mean,
those things don't really understand logic or
anything like that, right? So the type of system
that we're talking about that might approach animal level intelligence, let alone human level intelligence,
have not been designed. They don't exist, and so
discussing their danger and their potential harm
is a bit like discussing the sex of angels at
the moment, or, to be a little more accurate,
perhaps it would be kind of like discussing
how we're going to make transatlantic flight at
near the speed of sound safe when we haven't yet
invented the turbojet in 1925. We can speculate,
but how did we make a turbojet safe? It required
decades of really careful engineering to make
them incredibly reliable and now we can run
like halfway around the world with a two-engine
turbojet aircraft. I mean, that's an incredible
feat. And it's not like people were discussing
sort of philosophical questions about how you
make turbojet safe. It's just really careful
and complicated engineering that no one none of us
would understand. So you know, how can we ask the
AI community now to explain how AI systems are
going to be safe? We haven't invented them yet,
yeah, okay. That said, I have some idea about
how we can design them so that they have these
capabilities and, as a consequence, how they will
be safe. I call this objective-driven AI, so what
that means is essentially systems that produce
their answer by planning their answer so as to
satisfy an objective or a set of objectives. So
this is very different from current LLMs. Current
LLMs just produce one word after the other, or
one token which is a transferable unit. It doesn't
matter. They don't really think and plan ahead.
As we said before, they just produce one word
after the other. That's not controllable. The only
thing we can do is see if what they've produced,
check if what they've produced satisfies some
criterion or set of criteria, and then not
produce an answer or produce a non-answer if the
answer that was produced isn't appropriate. But we
can't really force them to produce an answer that
satisfies a set of objectives. So objective-driven
AI is the opposite. The only thing that the
system can produce are answers that satisfy
a certain number of objectives. So what objective
would be? Did you answer the question? Another
objective could be, Is your answer understandable
by a 13-year-old, because you're talking to a
13-year-old? Another would be is this, I don't know,
terrorist propaganda or something? You can have a
number of criteria, like these, guardrails that
would guarantee that the answer that's produced
satisfies certain criteria, whatever they are?
Same for a robot, you could guarantee that the
sequence of actions that is produced will not
hurt anyone. Like you can have very low level
guardrails of this type that say okay, you have
humans nearby and you're cooking, so you have a
big knife in your hand, don't flair your arms,
okay, that would be a very simple guardrail to
impose, and you can imagine having a whole bunch
of guardrails like this that will guarantee that
the behavior of those systems would be safe and
that their primary goal would be to be basically
subservient to us. So I do not believe that we'll
have AI systems that can work, that will not be
subservient to us, will define their own goals -
they will define their own sub-goals, but those
sub-goals would be sub-goals of goals that we set
them, and will not have all kinds of guardrails
that will guarantee their safety. And we're not
going to, It's not like we're going to invent
a system and make a gigantic one that we know will
have human-level AI and just turn it on and then,
from the next minute, is going to take over the
world. That's completely preposterous. What we're
going to do is try with small ones, maybe as
smart as a mouse or something, maybe a dog,
maybe a cat, maybe a dog maybe and work our way up
and then put some more guardrails, basically like
we've engineered more and more powerful and more
reliable turbojets. It's an engineering problem.
Yeah, yeah, you were also on a paper.
Maybe this is the one that talked about
the embodied Turing test on neuro-AI.
Can you explain what neuro-AI is?
Okay. Well, it's the idea that we should get
some inspiration from neuroscience to build
AI systems and that there is something to be
learned from neuroscience and from cognitive
science to drive the design of AI systems.
Some inspiration, something to be learned,
as well as the other way around. What's
interesting right now is that the best models
that we have of how, for example, the visual
cortex works is convolutional neural networks,
which are also the models that we use to recognize
images, primarily in artificial systems. There is
information being exchanged both ways. One way
to make progress in AI is to ignore nature and
just try to solve problems in an engineering
fashion, if you want. I found interaction with
neuroscience always thought-provoking. You
don't want to be copying nature too closely,
because there are details in nature that are
irrelevant and there are principles on which
natural intelligence is based that we haven't
discovered. But there is some inspiration to have,
certainly convolutional nets were
inspired by the architecture of the visual
cortex. The whole idea of neural nets and deep
learning came out of the idea that intelligence
can emerge from a large collection of simple
elements that are connected with each other and
change the nature of their interactions. That's
the whole idea. Inspiration from neuroscience
has been extremely beneficial so far, and the
idea of neural AI is that you should keep going.
You don't want to go too far. Going too far, for
example, is trying to reproduce some aspect of the
functioning of neurons with electronics. I'm not
sure that's a good idea. I'm skeptical about this,
for example. So your research right
now, are you, your main focus is
on furthering the JEPA architecture into
other modalities, or where are you headed?
Yeah, so, I mean, the long term goal is, you know,
to get machines to be as intelligent and learn
as efficiently as animals and humans. Okay, and
the reason for this is that we need this because
we need to amplify human intelligence, and so
intelligence is the most needed commodity that
we want in the world, right? And so we could,
you know, possibly bring a new renaissance to
humanity if we could amplify human intelligence
using machines, which we are already doing with
computers, right, I mean, that's pretty much
what they've been designed to do. But even more,
you know, imagine a future where every one of us
has an intelligent assistant with us at all times.
They can be smarter than us. We shouldn't feel
threatened by that. We should feel like we are,
like, you know, a director of a big lab or a CEO
of a company that has a staff working for them of
people who are smarter than themselves. I mean,
we're used to this already. I'm used to this,
certainly working with people who are smarter
than me. So we shouldn't feel threatened by this,
but it's going to empower a lot of us, right,
and humanity as a whole. So I think that's a
good thing. That's the overall practical goal. If
you want right. Then there's a scientific question
that's behind this, which is really what is
intelligence and how do you build it? And
then which is you know, how can a system learn
the way animals and humans seem to be learning
so efficiently? And the next thing is, how do
we learn how the world works? By observation,
by watching the world go by, through vision
and all the other senses. And animals can do
this without language, right? So it has nothing
to do with language. It has to do with learning
from sensory percepts and learning mostly
without acting, because any action you take
can kill you. So it's better to be able to learn
as much as you can without actually acting at all,
just observing, which is what babies do in the
first few months of life. They can't hardly do
anything, right? So they mostly observe and
learn how the world works by observation.
So what kind of learning takes place there?
So that's obviously kind of self-supervised,
right, it's learning by prediction. That's an old
idea from cognitive science, and the thing is,
you know, we can learn to predict videos.
But then we noticed that predicting videos,
predicting pixels in video, is so infinitely
complicated that it doesn't work. And
so then came this idea of JEPA right. Learn
representations so that you can make predictions
in representation space, and that turned out to
work really well for learning image features,
and now we're working on getting this to work for
video and eventually we'll be able to use this to
learn world models where you show a piece of video
and then you say I'm going to take this action,
predict what's going to happen next in the
world and you know, which is a bit where the
Gaia system from Wayve is doing at a high level. But
we need this at various levels of abstraction so
that we can build, you know, systems that
are more general than autonomous driving.
Okay, that's the yeah, and it's my
fault so I won't go over the hour,
but is it conceivable that someday
there will be a model that you,
maybe embodied in a robot that is ingesting
video from its environment and learning,
as it's just continuously learning and
getting smarter, and smarter, and smarter?
Yeah, I mean, that's kind of a bit of a
necessity, the reason being that you know,
even if you train a system to have a world model
that can predict what's going to happen next.
The world is really complicated and there's
probably all kinds of situations that you,
you know the system hasn't been
trained on and needs to, you know,
fine tune itself as it goes. So you know, animals
and humans do this early in life by playing. So
play is a way of learning your world model in
situations that basically you won't hurt you,
and but then during life, of course, you
know, when we learn to drive, there's all
kinds of these mistakes that we do initially,
that we don't do after having some experience,
and that's because we're fine tuning our world
model to some extent. Yeah, learning a new task,
we're basically just learning a new version of
our world model, right? So, yeah, I mean, this
type of continuous, continual learning is going
to have to be present, but the overall power and
intelligence of the system will be limited by, you
know, how much a computer neural nets it is
using and various other constraints. You
know, computational constraints basically.
You know you're still young and
this. I'm not sure about that. Well,
you're younger than Geoff. Let me put it that way.
I'm younger than Geoff, I'm
older than Yoshua, yeah.
But this, the progress you've made on world
models is fairly rapid from my point of view
watching it. Are you hopeful that within your
career you'll have embodied robots that are
building world models through their interaction
in reality and then being able to? Well, I guess
the other question on world models: do you then
combine it with a language model to do reasoning,
or is the world model able to do reasoning on
its own? But are you hopeful that in your career
you'll get to the point where you'll have
this continuous learning in a world model?
Yeah, I sure hope so. I might have another, you
know, 10 useful years or something like this in
research before my brain, you know, turns into
bechamel sauce, but, or something like that.
You know 15 years, if I'm lucky, so, or perhaps
less, but yeah, I hope that there's going to be
breakthroughs in that direction during that
time. Now, whether that will result in the
kind of artifact that you're describing you know
robots that can Like you know domestic robots, for
example, or self-driving cars that can learn fairly
quickly by themselves, I don't know, because there
might be all kinds of obstacles that we have not
envisaged that may appear on the way. No, it's a
constant in the history of AI that you have some
new idea and a breakthrough and you think that's
going to solve all the world's problems, and then
you're going to hit a limitation and you have
to go beyond that limitation. So it's like you
know you're climbing a mountain. You find a way
to climb the mountain that you're seeing and you
know that once you get to the top you will have
the problem solved, because now it's, you know,
a gentle slope down and once you get to the top,
you realize that there is another mountain
behind it that you hadn't seen. So that's been
the history of AI right, where people have come up
with sort of new concepts, new ideas, new ways to
approach AI, reasoning, whatever perception, and
then realize that their idea basically was very
limited. And so you know this. Inevitably we're
trying to figure out what's the next revolution in
AI. That's what I'm trying to figure out, and so
you know, learning how the world works from video,
having systems that have world models, allow
systems to reason and plan. And there's something
I want to be very clear about, which is an answer
to your question, which is that you can have
systems that reason and plan without manipulating
language. Animals are capable of amazing feats of
planning and also, to some extent, reasoning. They
don't have language, at least most of them don't
and so many of them don't have culture because
they are mostly solitary animals. So you know,
it's only the animals that have some level of
culture. So the idea that a system can plan and
reason is not connected with the idea that you
can manipulate language. Those are two different
things. It needs to be able to manipulate abstract
notions, but those notions do not necessarily
correspond to linguistic entities like words or
things like that. We can have mental images. If
you want to think like you do, ask a physicist or
mathematician you know how their reason is very
much in terms of sort of mental models, nothing
to do with language Then you can turn things into,
into language. But that's a different story.
That's the second, second step. So you know,
we're going to have to figure out how to do this.
Reasoning, hierarchical planning in machines
reproduce this first and then, of course, you
know, sticking language on top of it will help,
like it will make those systems smarter and be
able you know, it will allow us to communicate
with them and teach them things and they're going
to be able to teach us things and stuff like that.
But this is a different question really,
the question of how we organize AI research
going forward, which is somewhat determined by how
afraid people are of the consequences of AI. So if
you have a rather positive view of the impact of
AI on society and you trust humanity and society
and democracy is to use it in good ways, then the
best way to make progress is to open research and
for the people who are afraid of the consequences,
whether they are societal or geopolitical,
they're putting pressure on governments around
the world to regulate AI in ways that basically
limit access, particularly of open source code
and things like that, and it's a big debate at
the moment. I'm very much on the side, so is
Meta, very much on the side of open research.
Yeah, actually that was something I was going
to ask you and now that you brought it up,
because I've been talking to people about this and
there is a view that, aside from the risks of open
source again Geoff Hinton saying, would you open
source thermonuclear weapons? Aside from that,
the question is whether open source can marshal
the resources to compete with proprietary models
and because of the tremendous resources required
for when you're scaling these models. And there's
a question as to whether or not Meta will
continue to open source future versions
of Llama or not continue to open source,
but whether it'll continue to invest the
resources needed to push the open source
models. So what do you think about that?
Okay, there's a lot to say about this, Okay. So
first thing is there's no question that Meta will
continue to invest the resources to build better
and better AI systems because it needs it for its
own products. So the resources will be invested.
Now the next question is will we continue to open
source the base models? And the answer is probably
yes, because that creates an ecosystem on top
of which an entire industry can be built, and
there is no point having 50 different companies
building proprietary, closed systems when you
can have one good open source base model that
everybody can use. It's wasteful and it's not
a good idea. And another reason for having open
source models is that nobody has, no entity as
powerful as it thinks it is, has a monopoly
on good ideas. And so if you want people we can
have good, new, innovative ideas to contribute,
you need an open source platform. If you want
the academic world to contribute, you need
open source platforms. If you want the startup
world to be able to build customized products,
you need open source base models, because
they don't have the resources to build, to
train large models. And then there is the history
that shows that for foundational technology, for
infrastructure type technology, open source always
wins. It's true of the software infrastructure of
the internet. In the early 90s and mid 90s there
was a big battle between Sun Microsystems and
Microsoft to deliver the software infrastructure
of the internet - operating systems, web servers,
web browsers and various server side and client
side frameworks. They both lost. Nobody is talking
about them anymore. The entire world of the web is
using Linux and Apache and MySQL and JavaScript,
and even the basic core code for web browsers is
open source. So open source won by a huge margin.
Why? Because it's safer, it gathers more people
to contribute. All the features are unnecessary,
it's more reliable, Vulnerabilities are fixed
faster and it's customizable. So anybody
can customize Linux to run on whatever
hardware they want. So open source wins.
But it's the same thing.
It's going to be the same thing. It's inevitable.
The people now who are climbing up like OpenAI,
their system is based on publications
from all of us and from open platforms
like PyTorch. ChatGPT is built using PyTorch.
PyTorch was produced originally by Meta. Now
it's owned by the Linux Foundation. It's open
source. They've contributed to it, by the way,
their LLM is based on transformer architectures
invented at Google. All the tricks to train,
all those things came out of various papers
from all kinds of different institutions,
including academia. All the fine-tuning techniques
are the same. So nobody works in a vacuum. The
thing is, nobody can keep their advance and their
advantage for very long if they are secretive.
Yeah, except that with these models, because
they're so compute intensive and they cost so
much money to train, you need somebody
like Meta who's going to be willing to
build them and open source them. That's why,
when I was asking whether they'll continue,
obviously Meta will continue
building resource intensive models,
but the question is whether they'll
continue to open source them.
I'm telling you the only reason why Meta could
stop open sourcing models is legal. So if
there is a law that outlaws open source AI
systems above a certain level of sophistication,
then of course we can't do it. If there are
laws that, in the US or across the world,
make it illegal to use public content to train AI
systems, then it's the end of AI for everybody,
not just for open source, or at least the end of
the type of AI that we are talking about today.
We might have new AI in the future, but that
doesn't require as much data. And then there
is liability. If you believe that someone is
doing something bad with an AI system that was
open sourced by Meta, then Meta is liable. Then
Meta will have a big incentive not to release it,
obviously. So the entire question about this is
around legal reasons and political decisions.
But on the idea of open source winning, don't
you need more people or more companies like
Metal building the foundation models
and open sourcing them? Or could it be
an open source ecosystem win based on
a single company building the models?
No, I mean you need two or three, and
there are two or three, right. I mean,
there is this Hugging Face. There is Mistral
in France, who is also embracing open source LLM
they're very good LLM. It's a small one, but it's
very good. There are academic efforts like LAION.
They don't have all the resources they need, but
they collect the data that is used by everyone,
so everybody can contribute. One thing that
I think is really important to understand
also is that there is a future in which I
described earlier, in which every one of us,
every one of our interactions with the digital
world, would be mediated by an AI assistant,
and this is going to be true for everyone around
the world, right? Everyone who has any kind of
smart device. Eventually, it's going to be in our
augmented reality glasses, but for the time being,
in our smartphones. And so imagine that future
where you are, I don't know, from Indonesia or
Senegal or France and your entire digital diet
is done through the mediation of an AI system.
Your government is not going to be happy about it.
Your government is going to want the local culture
to be present in that system. It doesn't want
that system to be closed sourced and controlled
by a company on the west coast of the US. So
just for reasons of preserving the diversity
of culture across the world and not having our
entire information diet being biased by whatever
it is that some company on the west coast of the
US thinks there's going to need to be open source
platforms and they're going to be predominant in
at least outside the US for that reason, including
China. There is all those talks about oh what if
China puts their hand on our open source code? I
mean, China wants control over its own LLM because
they're a citizen to have access to certain types
of information. So they're not going to use our
LLMs, they're going to train theirs. That they
already have. And nobody is particularly ahead
of anybody else by more than about a year.
And China is pushing open source. I mean, they're
very pro open source within their ecosystems.
Some of them. There is no unified opinion there,
but I mean it's the same in the West, right,
there are some governments that are too afraid
of the risks and then, or are thinking about it,
and some others that are all for open source
because they see this as the only way for
them to have any influence on the information,
the type of information and culture that would
be mediated by those systems. So it's going to
have to be like Wikipedia, right? Wikipedia is built
by millions of people who contribute to it from
all around the world, in all kinds of languages,
and it has a system for vetting the information.
The way AI systems of the future will be taught
and will be fine tuned will have to be the
same way. It will have to be crowd sourced,
because something that matters to a farmer
in Southern India is probably not going to
be taken into account by the fine tuning done
by some company on the West Coast of the US.
AI might be the most important new computer
technology ever. It's storming every industry
and literally billions of dollars are being
invested, so buckle up. The problem is that
AI needs a lot of speed and processing power.
So how do you compete without cost spiraling
out of control? It's time to upgrade to
the next generation of the cloud Oracle
Cloud Infrastructure, or OCI. OCI is a single
platform for your infrastructure, database,
application development and AI needs. OCI has
four to eight times the bandwidth of other clouds,
offers one consistent price instead of
variable regional pricing. And, of course,
nobody does data better than Oracle. So now you
can train your AI models at twice the speed and
less than half the cost of other clouds. If
you want to do more and spend less, like Uber,
8x8 and Databricks Mosaic, take a free test drive
of OCI at oracle.com/eyeonai. That's E-Y-E-O-N-A-I
all run together: oracle.com/eyeonai.
That's it for this episode. I want to thank Yann
for his time. If you want to read a transcript
of this conversation, you can find one on our
website eye-on.ai, that's eye-on.ai. And remember
the singularity may not be near, but AI is
changing your world, so best pay attention.